<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>My efforts to discover this letter have failed. The following is from Croly’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Burke</i>: “Among his [Paine’s] earliest missives was a letter [from Paris] to Burke, whom he eagerly urged to introduce Revolution into England, by its established name of ‘Reform.’ Burke threw back the temptation, or the insult, at once. ‘Do you <em>really</em> imagine, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Paine,’ was his reply, ‘that the constitution of this kingdom requires such innovations, or <em>could exist with them</em>, or <em>that any reflecting man would seriously engage in them</em>? You are aware that I have, all my life, opposed such schemes of reform, because <em>I know them not to be Reform</em>.’ Paine, however, continued his ill-received correspondence; and whether from the delight of molesting Burke, or the expectation of making him a convert to a side which had the grand charm for the conviction of his own profligate heart, plunder; he sent him narratives of the rapidly recurring triumphs of democracy. In one of those he stated that the Reformers had already determined on the total overthrow of the [French] monarchy, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” This letter is said by the reverend biographer to have been written “exactly three days before the storming of the Bastille.” <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="preface-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, translated by F. Soulès, was published in Paris in <time datetime="1791-05">May, 1791</time>. This Preface has not appeared in any American edition, but a translation was given in Carlile’s edition, <time datetime="1819">1819</time>. The present translation is from the original French. <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> Lanthenas translated Parts <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in <time datetime="1792">1792</time>. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="preface-2.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The main and uniform maxim of the judges is, the greater the truth the greater the libel. <a href="preface-2.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richard Price, <abbr class="degree">D.D.</abbr>, <abbr class="initialism">F.R.S.</abbr>, died <time datetime="1791-04-19">April 19, 1791</time>. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Since writing the above, two other places occur in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke’s pamphlet in which the name of the Bastille is mentioned, but in the same manner. In the one he introduces it in a sort of obscure question, and asks: “Will any ministers who now serve such a king, with but a decent appearance of respect, cordially obey the orders of those whom but the other day, <em>in his name</em>, they had committed to the Bastille?” In the other the taking it is mentioned as implying criminality in the French guards, who assisted in demolishing it. “They have not,” says he, “forgot the taking the king’s castles at Paris.” This is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke, who pretends to write on constitutional freedom. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the French edition this allusion is explained in a footnote. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I am warranted in asserting this, as I had it personally from <abbr>M.</abbr> de la Fayette, with whom I lived in habits of friendship for fourteen years. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An account of the expedition to Versailles may be seen in <abbr>No.</abbr> 13 of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revolution de Paris</i> containing the events from the <time datetime="1789-10-03">3rd</time> to the <time datetime="1789-10-10">10th of October, 1789</time>. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The English rotten borough system was quoted in the United States Constitutional Convention, <time datetime="1787">1787</time>, as precedent for the disproportionate representation embodied in the Senate. But the new Constitution in America had been little studied in <time datetime="1791">1791</time> by Paine, and, fortunately for this argument, less by his opponents. In a modern English edition Paine’s text is invaded by the anachronism: “It is admitted that all this is altered, but there is much to be done yet, before we have a fair representation of the people.” <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Jordan’s addition, which superseded Johnson’s (of which only a few copies obtained circulation) this sentence begins, “Many things, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” But Burke, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Appeal</i>, was careful to quote the original sentence. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is a practice in some parts of the country, when two travellers have but one horse, which, like the national purse, will not carry double, that the one mounts and rides two or three miles ahead, and then ties the horse to a gate and walks on. When the second traveller arrives he takes the horse, rides on, and passes his companion a mile or two, and ties again, and so on⁠—Ride and tie. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word he used was <i xml:lang="fr">renvoyé</i>, dismissed or sent away. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>But on his return to America, after writing the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Age of Reason</i>, Paine learned by sad experience that the disestablishment of a church does not imply the disestablishment of Dogmas or of Intolerance. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When in any country we see extraordinary circumstances taking place, they naturally lead any man who has a talent for observation and investigation, to enquire into the causes. The manufacturers of Manchester, Birmingham, and Sheffield, are the principal manufacturers in England. From whence did this arise? A little observation will explain the case. The principal, and the generality of the inhabitants of those places, are not of what is called in England, <em>the church established by law</em>: and they, or their fathers, (for it is within but a few years) withdrew from the persecution of the chartered towns, where test-laws more particularly operate, and established a sort of asylum for themselves in those places. It was the only asylum that then offered, for the rest of Europe was worse.⁠—But the case is now changing. France and America bid all comers welcome, and initiate them into all the rights of citizenship. Policy and interest, therefore, will, but perhaps too late, dictate in England, what reason and justice could not. Those manufacturers are withdrawing, and arising in other places. There is now erecting in Passey, three miles from Paris, a large cotton manufactory, and several are already erected in America. Soon after the rejecting the Bill for repealing the test-law, one of the richest manufacturers in England said in my hearing, “England, Sir, is not a country for a dissenter to live in⁠—we must go to France.” These are truths, and it is doing justice to both parties to tell them. It is chiefly the dissenters that have carried English manufactures to the height they are now at, and the same men have it in their power to carry them away; and though those manufactures would afterwards continue in those places, the foreign market will be lost. There frequently appear in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">London Gazette</i>, extracts from certain acts to prevent machines and persons, as far as they can extend to persons, from going out of the country. It appears from these that the ill effects of the test-laws and church-establishment begin to be much suspected; but the remedy of force can never supply the remedy of reason. In the progress of less than a century, all the unrepresented part of England, of all denominations, which is at least a hundred times the most numerous, may begin to feel the necessity of a constitution, and then all those matters will come regularly before them. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When the English Minister, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pitt, mentions the French finances again in the English Parliament, it would be well that he noticed this as an example. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke, (and I must take the liberty of telling him that he is very unacquainted with French affairs), speaking upon this subject, says, “The first thing that struck me in calling the States-General, was a great departure from the ancient course;”⁠—and he soon after says, “From the moment I read the list, I saw distinctly, and very nearly as it has happened, all that was to follow.”⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke certainly did not see all that was to follow. I endeavoured to impress him, as well before as after the States-General met, that there would be a <em>revolution</em>; but was not able to make him see it, neither would he believe it. How then he could distinctly see all the parts, when the whole was out of sight, is beyond my comprehension. And with respect to the “departure from the ancient course,” besides the natural weakness of the remark, it shows that he is unacquainted with circumstances. The departure was necessary, from the experience had upon it, that the ancient course was a bad one. The States-General of <time datetime="1614">1614</time> were called at the commencement of the civil war in the minority of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>; but by the class of arranging them by orders, they increased the confusion they were called to compose. The author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">L’Intrigue du Cabinet</i>, (Intrigue of the Cabinet), who wrote before any revolution was thought of in France, speaking of the States-General of <time datetime="1614">1614</time>, says, “They held the public in suspense five months; and by the questions agitated therein, and the heat with which they were put, it appears that the great (<i xml:lang="fr">les grands</i>) thought more to satisfy their <em>particular</em> passions, than to procure the goods of the nation; and the whole time passed away in altercations, ceremonies and parade.”⁠—L’Intrigue du Cabinet, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 329. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is a single idea, which, if it strikes rightly upon the mind, either in a legal or a religious sense, will prevent any man or any body of men, or any government, from going wrong on the subject of religion; which is, that before any human institutions of government were known in the world, there existed, if I may so express it, a compact between God and man, from the beginning of time: and that as the relation and condition which man in his <em>individual person</em> stands in towards his Maker cannot be changed by any human laws or human authority, that religious devotion, which is a part of this compact, cannot so much as be made a subject of human laws; and that all laws must conform themselves to this prior existing compact, and not assume to make the compact conform to the laws, which, besides being human, are subsequent thereto. The first act of man, when he looked around and saw himself a creature which he did not make, and a world furnished for his reception, must have been devotion; and devotion must ever continue sacred to every individual man, <em>as it appears right to him</em>; and governments do mischief by interfering.</p>
					<p>Edmund Randolph, first Attorney-General of the United States, writing to Madison (<time datetime="1788-02-29"><abbr>Feb.</abbr> 29, 1788</time>) remarks concerning the new constitution’s <abbr>Art.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> <abbr>Sect.</abbr> 3: “Does not this exception as to religious test imply that the Congress, by the general words, had power over religion?” <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See this work, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> starting at line number 254.⁠—<abbr class="initialism">N.B.</abbr> Since the taking of the Bastille, the occurrences have been published: but the matters recorded in this narrative, are prior to that period; and some of them, as may be easily seen, can be but very little known. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fox and Lord North, with whom Burke also had united, though he and Fox had once proposed to impeach North. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>George <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, having become insane (<time datetime="1788">1788</time>), Pitt held, against Fox and Burke, that the Prince of Wales had no more right than any private individual to reign unless chosen by the two Houses of Parliament. No doubt Paine regarded this as virtually making over to the Peers a providential opportunity for a representative election. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See “Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Great Britain,” by G. Chalmers. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See “Administration of the Finances of France,” vol. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, by <abbr>M.</abbr> Neckar. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Administration of the Finances of France,” vol. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Whether the English commerce does not bring in money, or whether the government sends it out after it is brought in, is a matter which the parties concerned can best explain; but that the deficiency exists, is not in the power of either to disprove. While <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Price, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eden, (now Auckland), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chalmers, and others, were debating whether the quantity of money in England was greater or less than at the Revolution, the circumstance was not adverted to, that since the Revolution, there cannot have been less than four hundred millions sterling imported into Europe; and therefore the quantity in England ought at least to have been four times greater than it was at the Revolution, to be on a proportion with Europe. What England is now doing by paper, is what she would have been able to do by solid money, if gold and silver had come into the nation in the proportion it ought, or had not been sent out; and she is endeavouring to restore by paper, the balance she has lost by money. It is certain, that the gold and silver which arrive annually in the register-ships to Spain and Portugal, do not remain in those countries. Taking the value half in gold and half in silver, it is about four hundred tons annually; and from the number of ships and galloons employed in the trade of bringing those metals from South-America to Portugal and Spain, the quantity sufficiently proves itself, without referring to the registers.</p>
					<p>In the situation England now is, it is impossible she can increase in money. High taxes not only lessen the property of the individuals, but they lessen also the money capital of the nation, by inducing smuggling, which can only be carried on by gold and silver. By the politics which the British Government have carried on with the inland powers of Germany and the Continent, it has made an enemy of all the maritime powers, and is therefore obliged to keep up a large navy; but though the navy is built in England, the naval stores must be purchased from abroad, and that from countries where the greatest part must be paid for in gold and silver. Some fallacious rumours have been set afloat in England to induce a belief in money, and, among others, that of the French refugees bringing great quantities. The idea is ridiculous. The general part of the money in France is silver; and it would take upwards of twenty of the largest broad wheel wagons, with ten horses each, to remove one million sterling of silver. Is it then to be supposed, that a few people fleeing on horseback or in post-chaises, in a secret manner, and having the French Customhouse to pass, and the sea to cross, could bring even a sufficiency for their own expenses?</p>
					<p>When millions of money are spoken of, it should be recollected, that such sums can only accumulate in a country by slow degrees, and a long procession of time. The most frugal system that England could now adopt, would not recover in a century the balance she has lost in money since the commencement of the Hanover succession. She is seventy millions behind France, and she must be in some considerable proportion behind every country in Europe, because the returns of the English mint do not show an increase of money, while the registers of Lisbon and Cadiz show a European increase of between three and four hundred millions sterling. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Appeal</i>, Burke wrote of himself in the third person. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="preface-4.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>American colonial history, as explored since Paine’s time, mars this rosy picture. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="introduction-2.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>But a custom of lynching loyalists (“tories”), rebuked by Paine, arose, and some parts of America have never recovered from that cowardly kind of lawlessness. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That part of America which is generally called New England, including New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut, is peopled chiefly by English descendants. In the state of New York about half are Dutch, the rest English, Scotch, and Irish. In New Jersey, a mixture of English and Dutch, with some Scotch and Irish. In Pennsylvania about one third are English, another Germans, and the remainder Scotch and Irish, with some Swedes. The States to the southward have a greater proportion of English than the middle States, but in all of them there is a mixture; and besides those enumerated, there are a considerable number of French, and some few of all the European nations, lying on the coast. The most numerous religious denomination are the Presbyterians; but no one sect is established above another, and all men are equally citizens. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Le Républicain</i>, Paris, <time datetime="1791-07">July, 1791</time>, Paine wrote a letter in which he declared monarchy and hereditary succession incompatible with the Declaration of Rights in the new French Constitution. The Abbé Sieyès (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Moniteur</i>, <time datetime="1791-07-08">July 8</time>,) announced his intention of maintaining the principle of monarchical executive against the new party. Paine accepted the challenge, but Sieyès wrote that he had no leisure to enter into controversy with republican polycrats. See my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Paine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 312. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a character of aristocracy, the reader is referred to Rights of Man, Part I., starting at line number 1457. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was not uncommon in England, when the United States government began, to speak of the President as the President of Congress. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It had not been made known to the world that Washington had receded from this determination, announced at his inauguration. He received payment like other Presidents. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Not quite correct as to the United States. The old Congress invited the States to send delegates to the Constitutional Convention, appointed the day of meeting, and submitted their work to the several States for ratification. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and the three preceding paragraphs were omitted by Paine in his cheap edition (Symonds, <time datetime="1792">1792</time>) with the following statement: “Here follow, on page 52 of the original edition, four paragraphs. As those paragraphs are put into the information, and will publicly appear with the pleadings thereon, when the prosecution shall be brought to an issue, they are not verbally recited here, except the first of them, which is added in the annexed note, for the purpose of showing the spirit of the prosecuting party, and the sort of matter which has been selected from the work for prosecution.” After the note he adds: “Query: Does the prosecuting party mean to deny that instances of tyranny were acted by the Edwards and Henries? Does he mean to deny that the Stuarts endeavoured to pass the limits which the nation had prescribed? Does he mean to prove it libellous in any person to say that they did?”. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The whole amount of the assessed taxes of France, for the present year, is three hundred millions of francs, which is twelve millions and a half sterling; and the incidental taxes are estimated at three millions, making in the whole fifteen millions and a half; which among twenty-four millions of people, is not quite thirteen shillings per head. France has lessened her taxes since the revolution, nearly nine millions sterling annually. Before the revolution, the city of Paris paid a duty of upwards of thirty percent on all articles brought into the city. This tax was collected at the city gates. It was taken off on the first of last May, and the gates taken down. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What was called the <i xml:lang="fr">livre rouge</i>, or the red book, in France, was not exactly similar to the court calendar in England; but it sufficiently showed how a great part of the taxes was lavished. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In England the improvements in agriculture, useful arts, manufactures, and commerce, have been made in opposition to the genius of its government, which is that of following precedents. It is from the enterprise and industry of the individuals, and their numerous associations, in which, tritely speaking, government is neither pillow nor bolster, that these improvements have proceeded. No man thought about government, or who was in, or who was out, when he was planning or executing those things; and all he had to hope, with respect to government, was, <em>that it would let him alone</em>. Three or four very silly ministerial newspapers are continually offending against the spirit of national improvement, by ascribing it to a minister. They may with as much truth ascribe this book to a minister. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With respect to the two houses, of which the English parliament is composed, they appear to be effectually influenced into one, and, as a legislature, to have no temper of its own. The minister, whoever he at any time may be, touches it as with an opium wand, and it sleeps obedience.</p>
					<p>But if we look at the distinct abilities of the two houses, the difference will appear so great, as to show the inconsistency of placing power where there can be no certainty of the judgment to use it. Wretched as the state of representation is in England, it is manhood compared with what is called the house of Lords; and so little is this nicknamed house regarded, that the people scarcely enquire at any time what it is doing. It appears also to be most under influence, and the furthest removed from the general interest of the nation. In the debate on engaging in the Russian and Turkish war, the majority in the house of peers in favor of it was upwards of ninety, when in the other house, which was more than double its numbers, the majority was sixty-three.</p>
					<p>The proceedings on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox’s bill, respecting the rights of juries, merits also to be noticed. The persons called the peers were not the objects of that bill. They are already in possession of more privileges than that bill gave to others. They are their own jury, and if any one of that house were prosecuted for a libel, he would not suffer, even upon conviction, for the first offense. Such inequality in laws ought not to exist in any country. The French constitution says, <em>that the law is the same to every individual, whether to protect or to punish. All are equal in its sight</em>. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the state of representation in England, it is too absurd to be reasoned upon. Almost all the represented parts are decreasing in population, and the unrepresented parts are increasing. A general convention of the nation is necessary to take the whole form of government into consideration. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is related that in the canton of Berne, in Switzerland, it has been customary, from time immemorial, to keep a bear at the public expense, and the people had been taught to believe that if they had not a bear they should all be undone. It happened some years ago that the bear, then in being, was taken sick, and died too suddenly to have his place immediately supplied with another. During this interregnum the people discovered that the corn grew, and the vintage flourished, and the sun and moon continued to rise and set, and everything went on the same as before, and taking courage from these circumstances, they resolved not to keep any more bears; for, said they, “a bear is a very voracious expensive animal, and we were obliged to pull out his claws, lest he should hurt the citizens.” The story of the bear of Berne was related in some of the French newspapers, at the time of the flight of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, and the application of it to monarchy could not be mistaken in France; but it seems that the aristocracy of Berne applied it to themselves, and have since prohibited the reading of French newspapers. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is scarcely possible to touch on any subject, that will not suggest an allusion to some corruption in governments. The simile of “fortifications,” unfortunately involves with it a circumstance, which is directly in point with the matter above alluded to.</p>
					<p>Among the numerous instances of abuse which have been acted or protected by governments, ancient or modern, there is not a greater than that of quartering a man and his heirs upon the public, to be maintained at its expense.</p>
					<p>Humanity dictates a provision for the poor; but by what right, moral or political, does any government assume to say, that the person called the Duke of Richmond, shall be maintained by the public? Yet, if common report is true, not a beggar in London can purchase his wretched pittance of coal, without paying towards the civil list of the Duke of Richmond. Were the whole produce of this imposition but a shilling a year, the iniquitous principle would be still the same; but when it amounts, as it is said to do, to no less than twenty thousand pounds per annum, the enormity is too serious to be permitted to remain. This is one of the effects of monarchy and aristocracy.</p>
					<p>In stating this case I am led by no personal dislike. Though I think it mean in any man to live upon the public, the vice originates in the government; and so general is it become, that whether the parties are in the ministry or in the opposition, it makes no difference: they are sure of the guarantee of each other. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In America the increase of commerce is greater in proportion than in England. It is, at this time, at least one half more than at any period prior to the revolution. The greatest number of vessels cleared out of the port of Philadelphia, before the commencement of the war, was between eight and nine hundred. In the year <time datetime="1788">1788</time>, the number was upwards of twelve hundred. As the State of Pennsylvania is estimated at an eighth part of the United States in population, the whole number of vessels must now be nearly ten thousand. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When I saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pitt’s mode of estimating the balance of trade, in one of his parliamentary speeches, he appeared to me to know nothing of the nature and interest of commerce; and no man has more wantonly tortured it than himself. During a period of peace it has been havocked with the calamities of war. Three times has it been thrown into stagnation, and the vessels unmanned by impressing, within less than four years of peace. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> William Knowle, master of the grammar school of Thetford, in Norfolk. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Politics and self-interest have been so uniformly connected that the world, from being so often deceived, has a right to be suspicious of public characters, but with regard to myself I am perfectly easy on this head. I did not, at my first setting out in public life, nearly seventeen years ago, turn my thoughts to subjects of government from motives of interest, and my conduct from that moment to this proves the fact. I saw an opportunity in which I thought I could do some good, and I followed exactly what my heart dictated. I neither read books, nor studied other people’s opinion. I thought for myself. The case was this:⁠—</p>
					<p>During the suspension of the old governments in America, both prior to and at the breaking out of hostilities, I was struck with the order and decorum with which everything was conducted, and impressed with the idea that a little more than what society naturally performed was all the government that was necessary, and that monarchy and aristocracy were frauds and impositions upon mankind. On these principles I published the pamphlet <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Common Sense</i>. The success it met with was beyond anything since the invention of printing. I gave the copyright to every state in the Union, and the demand ran to not less than one hundred thousand copies. I continued the subject in the same manner, under the title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Crisis</i>, till the complete establishment of the Revolution.</p>
					<p>After the declaration of independence Congress unanimously, and unknown to me, appointed me Secretary in the Foreign Department. This was agreeable to me, because it gave me the opportunity of seeing into the abilities of foreign courts, and their manner of doing business. But a misunderstanding arising between Congress and me, respecting one of their commissioners then in Europe, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Silas Deane, I resigned the office, and declined at the same time the pecuniary offers made by the Ministers of France and Spain, <abbr>M.</abbr> Gerald and Don Juan Mirralles.</p>
					<p>I had by this time so completely gained the ear and confidence of America, and my own independence was become so visible, as to give me a range in political writing beyond, perhaps, what any man ever possessed in any country, and, what is more extraordinary, I held it undiminished to the end of the war, and enjoy it in the same manner to the present moment. As my object was not myself, I set out with the determination, and happily with the disposition, of not being moved by praise or censure, friendship or calumny, nor of being drawn from my purpose by any personal altercation, and the man who cannot do this is not fit for a public character.</p>
					<p>When the war ended I went from Philadelphia to Borden-Town, on the east bank of the Delaware, where I have a small place. Congress was at this time at Prince-Town, fifteen miles distant, and General Washington had taken his headquarters at Rocky Hill, within the neighbourhood of Congress, for the purpose of resigning up his commission (the object for which he accepted it being accomplished), and of retiring to private life. While he was on this business he wrote me the letter which I here subjoin:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">“Rocky-Hill, <time datetime="1783-09-10"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 10, 1783</time>.</p>
						<p>“I have learned since I have been at this place that you are at Borden-Town. Whether for the sake of retirement or economy I know not. Be it for either, for both, or whatever it may, if you will come to this place, and partake with me, I shall be exceedingly happy to see you at it.</p>
						<p>“Your presence may remind Congress of your past services to this country, and if it is in my power to impress them, command my best exertions with freedom, as they will be rendered cheerfully by one who entertains a lively sense of the importance of your works, and who, with much pleasure, subscribes himself,</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your sincere friend,</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">G. Washington.”</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>During the war, in the latter end of the year <time datetime="1780">1780</time>, I formed to myself a design of coming over to England, and communicated it to General Greene, who was then in Philadelphia on his route to the southward, General Washington being then at too great a distance to communicate with immediately. I was strongly impressed with the idea that if I could get over to England without being known, and only remain in safety till I could get out a publication, that I could open the eyes of the country with respect to the madness and stupidity of its Government. I saw that the parties in Parliament had pitted themselves as far as they could go, and could make no new impressions on each other. General Greene entered fully into my views, but the affair of Arnold and Andre happening just after, he changed his mind, under strong apprehensions for my safety, wrote very pressingly to me from Annapolis, in Maryland, to give up the design, which, with some reluctance, I did. Soon after this I accompanied Colonel Lawrens, son of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lawrens, who was then in the Tower, to France on business from Congress. We landed at L’Orient, and while I remained there, he being gone forward, a circumstance occurred that renewed my former design. An English packet from Falmouth to New York, with the Government dispatches on board, was brought into L’Orient. That a packet should be taken is no extraordinary thing, but that the dispatches should be taken with it will scarcely be credited, as they are always slung at the cabin window in a bag loaded with cannonball, and ready to be sunk at a moment. The fact, however, is as I have stated it, for the dispatches came into my hands, and I read them. The capture, as I was informed, succeeded by the following stratagem:⁠—The captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Madame</i> privateer, who spoke English, on coming up with the packet, passed himself for the captain of an English frigate, and invited the captain of the packet on board, which, when done, he sent some of his own hands back, and he secured the mail. But be the circumstance of the capture what it may, I speak with certainty as to the Government dispatches. They were sent up to Paris to Count Vergennes, and when Colonel Lawrens and myself returned to America we took the originals to Congress.</p>
					<p>By these dispatches I saw into the stupidity of the English Cabinet far more than I otherwise could have done, and I renewed my former design. But Colonel Lawrens was so unwilling to return alone, more especially as, among other matters, we had a charge of upwards of two hundred thousand pounds sterling in money, that I gave in to his wishes, and finally gave up my plan. But I am now certain that if I could have executed it that it would not have been altogether unsuccessful. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At a Society for Political Inquiries which met at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Franklin’s house, <time datetime="1787">1787</time>, (Philadelphia), Paine read a paper “On the inexpediency of incorporating, towns.” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Penn.</abbr> <abbr>Hist.</abbr> <abbr>Soc.</abbr> Memoirs</i>, <time datetime="1840">1840</time>.) The essay has not been discovered. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is difficult to account for the origin of charter and corporation towns, unless we suppose them to have arisen out of, or been connected with, some species of garrison service. The times in which they began justify this idea. The generality of those towns have been garrisons, and the corporations were charged with the care of the gates of the towns, when no military garrison was present. Their refusing or granting admission to strangers, which has produced the custom of giving, selling, and buying freedom, has more of the nature of garrison authority than civil government. Soldiers are free of all corporations throughout the nation, by the same propriety that every soldier is free of every garrison, and no other persons are. He can follow any employment, with the permission of his officers, in any corporation towns throughout the nation. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Sir John Sinclair’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Revenue</i>. The land-tax in <time datetime="1646">1646</time> was £2,473,499. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The motto of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Liberator</i> (Boston, <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>, <time datetime="1831-01-01"><abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1, 1831</time>) was: “Our country is the world, our countrymen are all mankind.” In adopting this motto Garrison was not aware of Paine’s sentence above, nor that Paine had been a pioneer in the cause of emancipation in America. The facts were pointed out to me by one of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garrison’s sons. See my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Paine</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 52 <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The two paragraphs preceding this were omitted by Paine in the cheap edition (Symonds, <time datetime="1792">1792</time>) with the following in parenthesis: “Those two short paragraphs are taken into the information as prosecutable matter; but on what ground such a prosecution can be supported I am at a loss to discover. Every part of which a government is composed must be alike open to examination and investigation; and where this is not the case the country is not in a state of freedom; for it is only by the free and rational exercise of this right, that errors, impositions, and absurdities can be detected and rendered either in the parts severally, or in the whole.⁠—If there be any part in a government on which the exercise of this right ought to be more fully insisted upon by a nation than on another part, it is on that part for which a nation pays the most money, and which, in England, is called the crown.”</p>
					<p>It may be noted that the two prosecuted paragraphs might now be quoted by conservatism in favour of the English monarchy, since Paine agrees that it is the laws that govern, and not the man. Practically, he regards retention of the throne as merely a question of expense. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Several of the court newspapers have of late made frequent mention of Wat Tyler. That his memory should be traduced by court sycophants and an those who live on the spoil of a public is not to be wondered at. He was, however, the means of checking the rage and injustice of taxation in his time, and the nation owed much to his valour. The history is concisely this:⁠—In the time of Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> a poll tax was levied of one shilling per head upon every person in the nation of whatever estate or condition, on poor as well as rich, above the age of fifteen years. If any favour was shown in the law it was to the rich rather than to the poor, as no person could be charged more than twenty shillings for himself, family and servants, though ever so numerous; while all other families, under the number of twenty were charged per head. Poll taxes had always been odious, but this being also oppressive and unjust, it excited as it naturally must, universal detestation among the poor and middle classes. The person known by the name of Wat Tyler, whose proper name was Walter, and a tiler by trade, lived at Deptford. The gatherer of the poll tax, on coming to his house, demanded tax for one of his daughters, whom Tyler declared was under the age of fifteen. The tax-gatherer insisted on satisfying himself, and began an indecent examination of the girl, which, enraging the father, he struck him with a hammer that brought him to the ground, and was the cause of his death. This circumstance served to bring the discontent to an issue. The inhabitants of the neighbourhood espoused the cause of Tyler, who in a few days was joined, according to some histories, by upwards of fifty thousand men, and chosen their chief. With this force he marched to London, to demand an abolition of the tax and a redress of other grievances. The court, finding itself in a forlorn condition, and, unable to make resistance, agreed, with Richard at its head, to hold a conference with Tyler in Smithfield, making many fair professions, courtier-like, of its dispositions to redress the oppressions. While Richard and Tyler were in conversation on these matters, each being on horseback, Walworth, then Mayor of London, and one of the creatures of the court, watched an opportunity, and like a cowardly assassin, stabbed Tyler with a dagger, and two or three others falling upon him, he was instantly sacrificed. Tyler appears to have been an intrepid disinterested man with respect to himself. All his proposals made to Richard were on a more just and public ground than those which had been made to John by the Barons, and notwithstanding the sycophancy of historians and men like <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke, who seek to gloss over a base action of the court by traducing Tyler, his fame will outlive their falsehood. If the Barons merited a monument to be erected at Runnymede, Tyler merited one in Smithfield. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I happened to be in England at the celebration of the centenary of the Revolution of <time datetime="1688">1688</time>. The characters of William and Mary have always appeared to be detestable; the one seeking to destroy his uncle, and the other her father, to get possession of power themselves; yet, as the nation was disposed to think something of that event, I felt hurt at seeing it ascribe the whole reputation of it to a man who had undertaken it as a job and who, besides what he otherwise got, charged six hundred thousand pounds for the expense of the fleet that brought him from Holland. George the First acted the same closefisted part as William had done, and bought the Duchy of Bremen with the money he got from England, two hundred and fifty thousand pounds over and above his pay as king, and having thus purchased it at the expense of England, added it to his Hanoverian dominions for his own private profit. In fact, every nation that does not govern itself is governed as a job. England has been the prey of jobs ever since the Revolution.</p>
					<p>For the above footnote the following was substituted by Paine in the cheap edition (Symonds, <time datetime="1792">1792</time>):</p>
					<p>“On page 116 of the original edition of this work is a note in which similar remarks are made on the characters of William and Mary, the one fighting against his uncle, and the other against her own father, as have been made by other writers. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, I believe, even while he was a pensioner of the present court, expressed himself in stronger terms of disapprobation than I have done. Why a change of policy has now taken place, of prosecuting at this time, what was permitted and apparently encouraged at another time, the persons concerned can best explain. In the same note it is stated that William charged six hundred thousand pounds for the expences of the Dutch fleet that brought him from Holland; and that George the First purchased the Duchies of Bremen and Verden with two hundred and fifty thousand pounds, which he got from England, and added them to his Hanoverian dominions for his own The note in which these matters are contained are put into the prosecution; but for what purpose I do not discover.</p>
					<p>“The bill of costs delivered in for the Dutch fleet, as stated in Sir John Sinclair’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Revenue</i> (Part the third, <abbr>p.</abbr> 40) was £686,500, and was reduced to £600,000 by parliament. And in <time datetime="1701">1701</time> the House of Commons came to a resolution, by which it appears that William was not very scrupulous or very careful in his expenditure of English money. The resolution is as follows:⁠—‘That it is notorious that many millions of money had been given to his majesty (meaning the said William) for the service of the public, which remain yet unaccounted for.’ See the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal</i>.</p>
					<p>“As to the purchase of Bremen and Verden, with the money obtained from England, by George the First, the Journals of Parliament will prove the fact, and the opposition it met with in parliament will shew the manner in which it was very generally considered by the faction.” <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charles, like his predecessors and successors, finding that war was the harvest of governments, engaged in a war with the Dutch, the expense of which increased the annual expenditure to £1,800,000 as stated under the date of <time datetime="1666">1666</time>; but the peace establishment was but £1,200,000. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Poor-rates began about the time of Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>., when the taxes began to increase, and they have increased as the taxes increased ever since. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reckoning the taxes by families, five to a family, each family pays on an average £12 7<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> per annum. To this sum are to be added the poor-rates. Though all pay taxes in the articles they consume, all do not pay poor-rates. About two millions are exempted: some as not being housekeepers, others as not being able, and the poor themselves who receive the relief. The average, therefore, of poor-rates on the remaining number, is forty shillings for every family of five persons, which make the whole average amount of taxes and rates £14 17<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> For six persons £17 17<abbr>s.</abbr> For seven persons £2O 16<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> The average of taxes in America, under the new or representative system of government, including the interest of the debt contracted in the war, and taking the population at four millions of souls, which it now amounts to, and it is daily increasing, is five shillings per head, men, women, and children. The difference, therefore, between the two governments is as under:</p>
					<table>
						<thead>
							<tr>
								<th/>
								<th colspan="3">England</th>
								<th colspan="3">America</th>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<th/>
								<th>£</th>
								<th>s.</th>
								<th>d.</th>
								<th>£</th>
								<th>s.</th>
								<th>d.</th>
							</tr>
						</thead>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>For a family of five persons:</td>
								<td>14</td>
								<td>17</td>
								<td>6</td>
								<td>1</td>
								<td>5</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>For a family of six persons:</td>
								<td>17</td>
								<td>17</td>
								<td>0</td>
								<td>1</td>
								<td>10</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>For a family of seven persons:</td>
								<td>20</td>
								<td>16</td>
								<td>6</td>
								<td>1</td>
								<td>15</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Public schools do not answer the general purpose of the poor. They are chiefly in corporation towns from which the country towns and villages are excluded, or, if admitted, the distance occasions a great loss of time. Education, to be useful to the poor, should be on the spot, and the best method, I believe, to accomplish this is to enable the parents to pay the expenses themselves. There are always persons of both sexes to be found in every village, especially when growing into years, capable of such an undertaking. Twenty children at ten shillings each (and that not more than six months each year) would be as much as some livings amount to in the remotest parts of England, and there are often distressed clergymen’s widows to whom such an income would be acceptable. Whatever is given on this account to children answers two purposes. To them it is education⁠—to those who educate them it is a livelihood. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The tax on beer brewed for sale, from which the aristocracy are exempt, is almost one million more than the present commutation tax, being by the returns of <time datetime="1788">1788</time>, £1,666,152⁠—and, consequently, they ought to take on themselves the amount of the commutation tax, as they are already exempted from one which is almost a million greater. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reports on the Corn Trade</i>. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When enquiries are made into the condition of the poor, various degrees of distress will most probably be found, to render a different arrangement preferable to that which is already proposed. Widows with families will be in greater want than where there are husbands living. There is also a difference in the expense of living in different counties: and more so in fuel.</p>
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>Suppose then fifty thousand extraordinary cases, at the rate of ten pounds per family per annum:</td>
								<td>£500,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>100,000 families, at £8 per family per annum:</td>
								<td>800,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>100,000 families, at £7 per family per annum:</td>
								<td>700,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>104,000 families, at £5 per family per annum:</td>
								<td>520,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>And instead of ten shillings per head for the education of other children, to allow fifty shillings per family for that purpose to fifty thousand families:</td>
								<td>250,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td class="total">£2,770,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>140,000 aged persons as before</td>
								<td>1,120,000</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td/>
								<td class="total">£3,890,000</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p class="continued">This arrangement amounts to the same sum as stated earlier in this work, including the £250,000 for education; but it provides (including the aged people) for four hundred and four thousand families, which is almost one third of an the families in England. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1772, Paine, then Exciseman at Lewes, wrote <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Case of the Officers of Excise</i>; with remarks on the qualifications of officers; and of the numerous evils arising to the Revenue from the insufficiency of the present salary. Humbly addressed to the <abbr>Hon.</abbr>, and Right <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Members of both Houses of Parliament. Though printed it was not published until <time datetime="1793">1793</time>. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was about a year later that Paine used this phrase as the title of his work on religion, which, however, did not appear until <time datetime="1794">1794</time>. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I know it is the opinion of many of the most enlightened characters in France (there always will be those who see further into events than others), not only among the general mass of citizens, but of many of the principal members of the former National Assembly, that the monarchical plan will not continue many years in that country. They have found out, that as wisdom cannot be made hereditary, power ought not; and that, for a man to merit a million sterling a year from a nation, he ought to have a mind capable of comprehending from an atom to a universe, which, if he had, he would be above receiving the pay. But they wished not to appear to lead the nation faster than its own reason and interest dictated. In all the conversations where I have been present upon this subject, the idea always was, that when such a time, from the general opinion of the nation, shall arrive, that the honourable and liberal method would be, to make a handsome present in fee simple to the person, whoever he may be, that shall then be in the monarchical office, and for him to retire to the enjoyment of private life, possessing his share of general rights and privileges, and to be no more accountable to the public for his time and his conduct than any other citizen. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In a <abbr class="initialism">MS.</abbr> note-Book of Thomas “Clio” Rickman, an anecdote, entered about <time datetime="1818">1818</time>, is told as follows: “The Duke of Kent, when at Gibraltar, some years since, visited in great state The Dey of Algiers. The Dey, wishing to ingratiate himself, said, <q>Your father is the greatest Pirate in the world, and I am the next!</q>” <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richard Watson (<time datetime="1737">1737</time>-<time datetime="1816">1816</time>). This homage in <time datetime="1792">1792</time> to the writer whose fame rests chiefly on his answer to Paine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Age of Reason</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Apology for the Bible</i>, <time datetime="1796">1796</time>) is worthy of note. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The gentleman who signed the address and declaration as chairman of the meeting, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Horne Tooke, being generally supposed to be the person who drew it up, and having spoken much in commendation of it, has been jocularly accused of praising his own work. To free him from this embarrassment, and to save him the repeated trouble of mentioning the author, as he has not failed to do, I make no hesitation in saying, that as the opportunity of benefiting by the French Revolution easily occurred to me, I drew up the publication in question, and showed it to him and some other gentlemen, who, fully approving it, held a meeting for the purpose of making it public, and subscribed to the amount of fifty guineas to defray the expense of advertising. I believe there are at this time, in England, a greater number of men acting on disinterested principles, and determined to look into the nature and practices of government themselves, and not blindly trust, as has hitherto been the case, either to government generally, or to parliaments, or to parliamentary opposition, than at any former period. Had this been done a century ago, corruption and taxation had not arrived to the height they are now at. <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Life of Thomas Pain, Author of the “Rights of Men,” with a Defence of his Writings. By Francis Oldys, <abbr class="initialism">A.M.</abbr> of the University of Pennsylvania</i>. George Chalmers, the clerk alluded to, by this purely fictitious claim to American connection, and pretence to “Defence,” proved himself quite equal to the surreptitious action suspected by Paine. His libellous <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">“Life”</i> proves him well acquainted with Paine’s transactions with the first printer. See my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Paine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 330. <cite>—⁠Conway</cite> <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
